[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Vikings dominated the North
Atlantic seas for at least 300
years, but how did they sail
across great distances with
incredible accuracy
without a magnetic compass?
A long-held theory about Vikings
using crystals for navigation
may have been proven
true with modern science.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Vikings, the
Great North Sea Men,
sailed from Norway to Greenland
and many parts in between.
They were known to have
amazing Maritime navigation
skills by using the sun to plot
their position on the globe.
But scientists have
wondered for years, how
could they navigate when
they could not see the sun?
Enter the sun stone, or
solar sign, a crystal
that, when held up
to a cloudy sky,
can help to locate the sun.
For years, the use
of sun stones have
been nothing but a
theory based on a legend,
such as this mention in
the tale, "Raudulfs Fattr."
>> "The King made
people look out,
and they could nowhere
see a clear sky.
Then he asked Sigurdur to tell
where the sun was at that time.
He gave a clear assertion.
Then, the king made them fetch
the solar stone and held it up
and saw where the light
radiated from the stone
and, thus, directly verified
Sigurdur's prediction."
>> Now, two Hungarian scientists
have used computer modeling
to determine that by using a
sun stone every three hours,
a medieval Viking could reach
Greenland with 92% to 100%
accuracy.
Kaedrich Olsen, author of "Runes
for Transformation," on how sun
stones work.
>> The way we think that these
work is since the sun stone
doubles the imagery within
it, and it's only with certain
polarized light, and
you look through it,
and as you scan the horizon,
you'll be able to pick up where
the sun is.
Now, the way you would navigate
off of that is, of course,
you have to be aware of how
many hours the sun has been up.
So as you're
scanning the horizon,
you're able to get an
idea of where the sun is,
so you get an angle of
where the sun is in the sky.
You know how many hours
it is, and based on that,
you can sort of do a
bit of a calculation
so that you can reorient
the navigation of your ship
so that you can stay on
course where you're going.
>> Viking sailing routes are
notorious for bad weather,
storms, and cloudy days.
The sun stone,
researchers have proven,
was a vital tool for navigation.
>> And the reason why you'd
want to use a sun stone is, say,
we're in the North
Sea or, really,
in the northern hemisphere
trying to navigate around,
it's really difficult
in that area,
because it's cloudy
most of the time,
so you don't know
where the sun is.
And if you don't know
where the sun is,
you don't know where you are.
Now, the neat property
of the sun stone
is it can help you detect where
the sun is behind the clouds.
And that's a very useful
thing to know when navigating.
>> Viking tales passed down
through time have mentioned sun
stones.
Why have we just recently looked
into the validity of their use?
>> It's one of those kind of fun
things in Norse lore where we
get a little fragment
of a hint of something,
and unless there's
archaeological evidence
to prove it or some sort of
correlating literature from
another culture, we just kind
of shrug it off saying we
don't know.
But since we've actually
found chunks of calcite
on, basically, Viking ships and
on other contemporary ships,
we know that they were
there-- used for that.
>> Viking culture has had a bad
reputation throughout history
as bloodthirsty,
violent raiders,
but is that an
accurate portrayal?
>> Since we're talking
around the 900s to 1200s,
commonly thought of
as the Viking era,
the reason why the Norse
people, with their Viking boats,
got such a horrid reputation is
their boats were able to only
sink just a few
inches into the water.
They gave them the
ability that they
could navigate across
great seas, where
they can effortlessly go up
estuaries and rivers almost
silently.
Think of the Viking boat as
the stealth bomber of its day.
People didn't see it coming.
They didn't hear it coming,
and more often than not,
really, the Vikings were
trading, mostly peaceful,
but those times
where they did do
the raiding and the
conquering, the history
was mostly written by the sore
losers rather than the winners.
So that's where we get
this inflated reputation
of the Vikings being
these really awful,
brutal, vicious warriors,
when, in truth, the archaeology
and the history shows us
that they were violent,
but they were no more
violent than just about
every other culture was at
the planet at the same time.
>> Although they have
had a bad reputation,
Vikings were not just vicious
marauders killing everyone
in sight.
Violent?
Yes, but no more than any other
civilization of their time.
They also had complex society,
religion, legal system, and now
researchers have proven
their use of technology.
This is another
example that shows
real history is different from
what we have learned in school,
seen in the movies,
and even read in books,
and the history we think we
may not be the full story.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.